[TIKO TIKO, "DEEPEST DIVE"]
>> Our life and life on this
planet and in the universe,
it's a continuous transformation
from one form of energy
to the other.
Electric thermal light.
The word "energy" comes from an
ancient Greek word, "energeia,"
which means "force in action."
Fusion energy checks
all the boxes.
It's the perfect energy source.
[TIKO TIKO, "DEEPEST DIVE"]
>> Energy is everything.
We know from physics
that no material object
is standing still.
Some of us also know
from our own experience
how energy moves through the
body and across the world.
Now, when it comes to
energy consumption,
everything is at stake.
Geopolitics, wars and peace,
pollution versus sustainability.
We can even assess
our level of evolution
as an advanced
civilization based
on how we can harness energy.
There is a theory
called Kardashev scale
that looks at this.
It has six levels.
And at the first
level, a civilization
is capable of using the energy
from everything on its planet.
This also includes the energy
coming from the planet's star.
In our case, that
star is the sun.
So at this level one, we
stop extracting minerals
from inside the Earth and we
become ecologically friendly.
At level two, we can
leverage all the energy
of the solar system.
And at level three,
we leverage the energy
of the planet's galaxy.
In our case, of the Milky Way.
Let's keep in mind
that all of the above
happens in a circular way, not
in an extractive or harmful way.
Level one already
is a civilization
with energy abundance.
What I like about this framework
is the magnitude of it.
We are not even a level one.
In this episode, we're
zooming into fusion energy
through the story
of Francesco Volpe,
a founder passionate
about magnetic fusion who
has made big discoveries
within fusion energy.
>> I always wanted to do
something related with science
or engineering and at the
same time do something good
for society.
I also liked arts.
I always cultivated
these two interests.
But at the age of 16, I
fell in love for physics,
in general, and for
fusion, in particular.
I read a very inspiring
book by Amaldi,
who was a disciple of Fermi.
I was fascinated
by modern physics.
In that book, I still
remember the three pages
dedicated to fusion.
Those sparked a light.
More than an idea, in the
sense of an invention.
It was a discovery.
No stellarator
startup existed yet
and no fusion startup
existed in Europe yet.
So I decided to fill both gaps
for startup or magnetic fusion
startup in Europe,
first stellarator
startup in the world,
and take advantage
of this environment more
suitable for these high risk
but very high reward idea.
On this planet, fusion is
the ultimate energy source.
Fusion was considered at the
border of science fiction
a few decades ago.
Fusion, after all, was
proven in a lab in the 20s.
It is not as far-fetched as
these science fiction stories
or matter-antimatter energy.
The newest form of energy
fusion is at the same time also
the most ancient, the most
primordial form of energy
in the universe that has powered
it nearly since its inception.
It's a huge endeavor,
but we are making it.
The source of energy
of the universe
will make life here on Earth
easier and more sustainable.
>> So what are all the forms
of energy production that could
start making a big
difference today?
Renewables like solar
and wind only go as far.
They require a significant
use of raw materials
for their creation and they only
last for a limited time span.
When it comes to forms of
energy, such as geothermal,
nuclear, hydrogen, and
fusion, the improvements
in eliminating pollution
and resource usage
can be exponential.
Geothermal energy is heat
energy from the Earth.
It comes from reservoirs of
hot water below the ground.
There is an exciting trend
across all forms of energy
we are talking about
in this episode,
and that is the shrinking in
size and democratized access
to these forms of energy.
So when it comes to
geothermal energy,
low-temperature
geothermal heat can
be found in many
parts of the world,
making it more broadly available
than traditional geothermal.
Companies like Kleiman have
pioneered the move away
from the large centralized
plants that have
to dig deep into the ground.
Instead, they are providing
decentralized heat power
generation at low
temperatures, which
makes it widely available
like solar and wind.
Now, when it comes
to fusion energy,
Francesco and the team
at Renaissance Fusion
have been developing a machine
that they call the stellarator.
It can recreate the same
process that fuels the sun.
It is like a mini-sun
available here on Earth.
>> Fusion is different and
better than traditional nuclear
fission reactions.
Fusion is the energy source, the
Holy Grail of energy, as we say.
It is such a huge
opportunity for mankind,
for the economy, that
it should be explored
and everybody, private
and public, in any country
should pursue that.
How much should we care?
Some detractors of
fusion say let's focus
on solutions ready now
to address the climate
emergency now.
Fusion is 30 years away
and always will be.
You can't imagine how fed up
I am of this joke of fusion
being 30 years away,
perennially being 30 years away.
My mission, career-wise,
and the mission
of Renaissance Fusion and
the Fusion Startup Movement
is to disprove this joke.
We are not 30 years away.
We are 10 years away, and
the world should care.
For a fraction, tiny
fraction, of the energy costs
in terms of operation and R&D
costs on other forms of energy,
for a tiny fraction
of that, we could
seize the power of the stars,
so we should really do it.
We are in a fusion lab, in
a commercial fusion lab,
so we are realizing fusion
in the following way.
We create the fourth
state of matter.
So like the ancient earth,
water, air, and fire.
So solid, liquid,
gas, and plasma.
The fourth state of
matter, ionized gas,
you have to make this plasma.
And for fusion, since this
plasma is made of particles
and you want this particle
to collide and fuse,
you want them to
collide at high energy.
This is obtained by bringing
that gas to high temperature.
And also, you want
many reactions,
therefore, you want
many particles,
therefore, you
want high density.
So fusion consists
in taking a gas,
separating the nuclei
from the electrons.
Now you have this soup,
this primordial soup
of ions and electrons.
There are several
ways of doing that.
We are developing
some prototypes.
In magnetic fusion, you keep
these particles away from
the walls of the container
because, otherwise,
you cannot make
hotter than the sun.
So, yes, we make
this ionized gas.
We bring it to sufficiently
high density and temperature.
And we want the energy produced
by the fusion reactions
to stay in the
plasma long enough
to maintain the plasma
hot and, therefore, foster
other reactions.
It's a little bit like when
you start a fire with a match.
If there is a lot
of wind blowing,
the heat that you are
injecting to create this flame
is transported away and your
wood doesn't quite burn.
We build new magnets,
revolutionary magnets,
to decouple the physics
from the engineering.
The physics is
inevitably complex.
This plasma has a shape
which is inevitably complex,
dictated by some equations.
But the engineering of how to
generate this magnetic field,
basically, the design of
the magnets, can be simple.
Some simple magnets can generate
very complex magnetic fields.
In a conventional
stellarator, you
need magnets looking like
three-dimensional sculptures,
rings but highly deformed rings.
We replace
three-dimensional sculptures
with painting, a painting
where the brush is a laser
and the canvas is
a superconductor.
We make cylinders,
cylindrical canvas
coated with superconductor
in our machines.
The subject of fusion
was declassified in 1957.
And from 1957, all
countries worldwide
have collaborated on the
peaceful utilization of fusion
to indeed produce energy.
That is the official birthday of
fusion energy for peaceful uses.
We are at this crucial
moment and standing
on the shoulders of giants.
It's a big, big endeavor.
>> How about nuclear energy?
A few decades ago,
this industry was
seen as a great promise
for green consumption.
The accidents that
happened in the US,
in Chernobyl, and then
in Japan gave rise
to public protests on one side
and to lobbying against it
by competitive industries
on the other side.
If you compare nuclear to coal,
the coal industry causes 15,000
direct deaths every year and
millions of indirect ones.
In four decades, traditional
nuclear energy has caused
a total of less than
5,000 direct deaths.
Even considering this, we
can't ignore the dangers
of radioactive nuclear waste.
And that is where innovation,
such as more modular reactors,
is supposed to come in.
Small modular reactors are
advanced nuclear reactors
with about one-third
of the generating
capacity of traditional
nuclear power reactors.
Studies are showing that these
reactors could exponentially
increase the volume of
short-lived, low-level waste, as
opposed to more harmful waste,
but that is still a theory.
Small modular reactors
are facing issues
around cost and scalability.
>> In traditional nuclear,
in conventional nuclear,
we start with uranium or other
heavy nuclei and we split them
into smaller ones.
Fusion consists in taking
light nuclei like hydrogen,
for example, and fusing these
light nuclei into heavier ones.
Now, both in the case of fission
and in the case of fusion,
if you take the mass
of the reactants
and the mass of
the products, you
will notice that there
is a deficit of mass.
Some mass has been lost.
The products are lighter
than the reactants.
So according to the
famous equation,
energy equals mass times
speed velocity squared,
by Einstein, mass is energy.
That deficit in mass results
in a surplus in energy.
In this reaction, some mass
has been converted in energy.
And because the velocity of
light is a very high number,
a small deficit in mass results
in a huge amount of energy.
So it is an extremely
efficient source of energy.
Very small amounts
of fuel result
in large amounts of energy,
even more than fusion.
The energy density,
as we say, basically,
how much density per unit
mass of the fuel of fusion,
is the highest of all
energy sources, by far,
by orders of magnitude.
This makes it very attractive,
combined with the fact
that the fuel is very abundant.
And it can be derived
indirectly from lithium.
It has a small
footprint, unlike,
for example, solar or wind.
It needs small amounts of
land to generate energy.
All these aspects,
plus, of course,
the fact that it doesn't produce
any carbon dioxide and the fact
that it is not intermittent,
unlike the sun or the wind,
all these factors
combined together
led to calling fusion
the Holy Grail of energy.
Fusion can go very far but
is something happening soon.
One question is how soon?
How can we make it quicker?
Can we make it quick
enough, for example,
to contribute to
fighting climate change?
This is a major question.
And there are two
schools of thought.
So if you ask me and other
enthusiasts about fusion,
it will contribute very
soon, in a few years, again,
a decade or so,
combating climate change.
So in the 2030s, a large
fraction of the world population
will live in metropolitan
areas or in megalopolis.
There is a tendency to that.
I believe the statistics are of
the order of 70% of the world
population, in the late 2030s,
will live in these large
metropolitan areas.
These large areas need
these large power plants,
whatever the energy source,
but they will need gigawatts.
You cannot ask the sun to shine
brighter or the wind to blow
stronger.
We need additional
energy sources.
Fusion is ideally
suited to address that.
Can fusion power
a small community?
Can fusion power a ship?
Can fusion power an
airplane or a car?
Each of these objectives
is more and more ambitious.
Maritime transportation
can definitely
be decarbonized by fusion after,
again, power plants on land
will be demonstrated.
>> How are we going to produce
truly green energy for everyone
and change the dynamics of
an industry that has caused
suffering all across history,
especially during these times?
Nuclear fusion has the potential
to produce four million times
more energy than fossil fuels.
Most experts say that
we are unlikely to be
able to generate large-scale
energy from nuclear fusion
before 2050.
I say that talking about
2050 today is nonsense.
We can't make
accurate predictions
on such a long-term scale.
We don't have that time anyway.
>> If we think of the
history of aviation,
if we think of
hydroelectric power,
one of the birthplaces of
which, by the way, is Grenoble.
If we think of the
birth of nuclear power,
in all these major inflection
points in human history,
there is a zeitgeist, there
is a spirit of the time.
We are close to the
Kitty Hawk moment.
Today, someone will be
the next Wright brothers.
And a couple of decades
afterwards, some company
will be the next
Boeing or Airbus.
It's like when nuclear
energy, fission
energy was discovered and
demonstrated for peaceful uses.
It was in the air.
Various groups in various
countries were working on it.
It was not a question of "if."
It was a question on "when"
and "who" and "how" exactly,
but the basic
principles were there.
We are at this crucial
moment in history.
The principles are there.
It will happen.
It's a question of who is going
to make it and how exactly.
And not necessarily it
will be a single invention,
just like we have
airplanes and helicopters
or just like we have different
types of fusion reactors
or vapor pressure machine
in the Industrial Revolution
and so forth.
I can continue with
other analogies.
These crucial moments incarnate,
embody into two, three,
four different
inventions, all equally
transformational
and complementary.
The enthusiasm of the fusion
community, especially the fusion
startup community,
the advances that it
is doing few months,
sometimes, whereas
in some other
organizations, often,
it took years and
10 times the budget,
is paving the way to this
crucial inflection point.
So I have not the
slightest doubt
that we are at the
verge of this moment.
And we are so close
that fusion, in itself,
would be already super
futuristic, is the future coming
to the present, is a future that
somebody thought to be too far,
science fiction, indeed,
and instead, realizing it
in a decade.
That's already a
huge price for me.
>> I believe that the innovation
we need in today's world comes
through unique states of
mind and at the intersection
of different sectors.
This is why we cover a wide
range of positive innovation
through Road to Utopia.
This is an invitation
to think differently.
So what does divergent
thinking look like?
One of my favorite
quotes by Albert Einstein
has him saying that the
medicine of the future
will be frequency medicine.
Nobody was talking about this
concept publicly at his time
and nobody does today either.
But Einstein was a polymath.
He also surrendered
to how little we grasp
about how the universe works.
He brought together
different fields
and tapped into
powerful states of mind.
We don't need to be Einstein
to have a curious mind.
There are so many
entrepreneurs like Francesco
advancing the way we
understand energy.
We can approach it as a
scientist, as an activist,
as a designer, as an
artist, or as someone
who is keen to join
sustainable companies that
are part of the solution.
>> Something is in the air.
You can feel when the
invention is coming.
You can feel it is possible.
It is an entire movement,
an entire society,
a workforce of scientists,
engineers working on it.
A society ready to use that
invention or that discovery.
It's only a question of how
precisely that thing which
is in the air will materialize.
Today, with fusion, we
are not at the drawings
of Leonardo of how to fly.
The newest form of energy
is at the same time
the most ancient form of energy
in the universe that has powered
it nearly since its inception.
And now we are realizing it
on Earth for the greater good,
for a sustainable energy
future for generations to come,
for millions of years to come.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[FLOATING WORLD, "NOBODY KNOWS"]
Going south.
Nobody knows my name.